---
title:  "What does the PhD application process look like?"
date: 2023-01-31
permalink: 
tags: 
    - applications
---


Okay, so you’ve [done your research](https://ryanj-ellison.github.io/2023/01/31/_02-Four-things-to-consider.html) and decided that a PhD is for you. You’ve decided on some factors that are important to you (being location, a specific univeristy, subjects that you’re interested in), and you’ve identified some projects you’re interested in applying to. What next?

Well apply of course! But what does this application process look like? That’s what we’re going to discuss in this article.

**Written Application** 

The first stage of the application process is always a written application. What this looks like will vary from program to program, but generally you’re asked to submit a CV and then something resembling the contents of a cover letter. You might be asked to submit a cover letter, a statement of interest, or fill in an online applicaion form. The common thread is that you’re being asked “why this project?”, and now increasingly “why this reasearch institute?”. An important point to make here is that the cover letter component should be unique and tailored to each application. This doesn’t mean that there can’t be any components in common, because typically there will be some overlap. Many applications for example may ask you to list your previous research experience, or ask why you want to study for a PhD. However, you should adjust twhat you write to specifically address key points raised by that application.

This specific adjustment can take a few forms. It may be that the project you’re applying to mentions specific lab techniques will be used, e.g. PCR mutagenesis followed by establishing cell lines with the constructs created using PCR, with the aim of looking at the effect of the mutagenesis on cell division. In this case, you might want to mention how much you enjoyed your lectures on cell division (which is hopefully true if you’re applying to a project on it) and maybe you did a summer project that involved a lot of PCR. It could be that the institute you’re applying to lists certain values on their website as being important, such as teamwork and leadership. Maybe you can demonstrate that you have these skills from an extracurricular activity you did, such as being part of a sports team or volunteer group. The important point isn’t necessarily what you did, but how you make it relevant.

When making applications, my advise it to focus on a smaller number of tailored, specific applications, rather than the “shotgun approach” of sending the same application to many places. Institutes and supervisors want to know why you’re interested in their specific program/project/institute, and can tell a generic application from a mile away. This essentially just makes you seem uninterested, and especially if they recieve a large number of applications they’re likey to just bin yours straight away. A PhD is a long process and they want to see that you have the interest and commitment to drive the project to completion across 3-4 years.

On a more practical note, some places might give you a form to download and fill in, whereas for others there will be an online portal or form that you have to fill in. In the case of the latter, I would always recommend copying the question into word or google docs and editing it locally, so as to avoid losing progress if the website crashes or something similar. This also helps make the proofreading process easier.

**The Interview stage**

If you’re succesful at the written application stage, then you’ll pass through to the interview stage. You’ll always have at least one interview, but some places can do multiple interviews over multiple days. For example, when I interviewed for a PhD program at the Univeristy of York (which I’m now based at), I had one interview with the 3 project supervisors. However when I applied to the institute of Cancer Research (ICR) in London, the interview process took place over 2 days. We had a pannel interview on the first day, and then met with indivdual supervisors to talk about their projects on the second day, if successful on the first day of the interview.

As a disclaimer, I’m a PhD student, not a supervisor, department head, etc, so I can’t tell you exactly what they’re thinking at interview. That being said, in my experience, the interview stage is trying mainly to determine 2 things: Are you a good fit for the lab, and are you a good fit for the project? The former is quite subjective, but the latter generally revolves around whether you have the determination and interest to drive the PhD project to completion. Interest in the project is a key requirement, and I would advise against applying to any project that doesn’t make you excited. However, there will be times when your project is less than exciting, and you might even hate it. [Grit is what will get you through these times](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H14bBuluwB8). If you have lab skills and experience that are relevant to the project then that’s always a plus. However, generally speaking skills are relatively easy to teach, whereas attitude is very difficult to change.

The final thing to say about the interview stage is that it’s a crucial opportunity for you to see if the project, lab group, instiution etc are a good fit for you. Remember that you’ll be giving 3-4 years of your life to this place, so it’s important to get it right! Look around the city where the institute is based, and look around the institute itself. Ask the supervisor any questions you may have about the institute, but also make sure to speak to current students. Ask them what the institute is like, but importantly, ask them what the supervisor is like! I can’t stress enough the importance of finding a supportive supervisor, and also a supervisor whose work and supervision style is compatible with your own. Do they like to meet every day, every week, every month? How hands-on is their supervision style? Do they do lab work themselves, or do they have a lot of other departmental commitments, such as teaching, grant writing, conducting interviews and sitting on committees? If you plan to work as a teaching assistant at the institute during your PhD (not all places allow this), is your supervisor likely to be supportive? These are all things that can affect your PhD experience. These can be difficult to gauge correctly, but it’s worth putting the effort in as I think this can really help inform your decision. Obviously we’re not all fortunate enough to be able to choose between multiple PhD projects. However, even if you only have one offer, you’re still making a choice about whether to accept or not, based on whether you think the position will be a good fit for you.

And after the interview stage comes the uncomfortable period of waiting to hear back. This can take from a few days to a few weeks, and potentially longer depending on how many applications the program had and what time of year it is.

**Closing thoughts**

As you might be able to tell from my description, the PhD application process is a huge amount of effort, so I would advise to carefully ration your time and select projects that you really do care about.

I hope this explanation was useful, and if you agree, then consider sharing it with others on Twitter or LinkedIn, or even at your university.

I’d like to finish by advising you not to be discouraged if you aren’t succesful with your first or even tenth application. When I was applying to PhDs, I think I submitted about 10 applications before I even got an interview offer. Overall I had 4 interviews, of which I was succesful at 2. But in the end, all you need is one offer. I’ve seen tweets from people claiming to have recieved rejections from upwards of 25 PhD programs, So ultimately, don’t be disheartened if you’re not successful. Just keep trying. You only need one to say yes.